chapter3.md, before:

---
title       : Lab 3 *figure out how to get mosaic in here
description : Summarizing and Visualizing Data

--- type:NormalExercise lang:r xp:100 skills:1 key:fe98ce0ad3
## Using the srt() function to reveal Variable Types

If we want to know the *types of variables* in our data set, we can type the command `str(dataset)` into the R Console.

This will return all of the variable names as well as their type (i.e. numeric, factor, integer). 

*Categorical* variables will be will be `factor` variable types.

*Quantitative* variables will be `numeric` and `integer` variable types.

For this lab, we will use a dataset called `cdc` which contains data on the health of people in the United States.

- there are 9 variables in the dataset
- there are 20,000 subjects
- this dataset is already in your workspace so if you type `cdc` into your console, the data will come up in the output

*** =instructions

- Use the `str()` function to find the variable types of `cdc`
- Click the 'Submit Answer' Button and take a look at the R output in the console.
*** =hint

*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}
source("https://www.openintro.org/stat/data/cdc.R")

```

*** =sample_code
```{r}
# Find the variable types of cdc
```

*** =solution
```{r}
# Find the variable types of cdc
str(cdc)
```



*** =sct
```{r}
test_function("str", args = "object")
```


--- type:NormalExercise lang:r xp:100 skills:1 key:53e494b387
## Changing Variable Types

You may have noticed from the previous exercise that the `smoke100` variable is coded as numeric, but this is incorrect.


R thinks that the `smoke100` variable is 'numeric' but really it should be coded as 'factor' because it is a **categorical variable**. 

`smoke100` only takes on two values *(1 = respondent has smoked at least 100 cigarettes in their life, 0 = otherwise)*. 

In this exercise we are going to recode the `smoke100` variable from a numeric to a factor variable type.


*** =instructions
- Copy this code to your R script: `cdc$smoke100 <- factor(cdc$smoke100, labels = c("no smoke", "yes smoke"))`
- Use the `str()` function on `cdc` 
- Click the 'Submit Answer' Button and take a look at the R output in the console. Make sure the `smoke100` variable was correctly recoded to a factor variable
*** =hint

*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}
source("https://www.openintro.org/stat/data/cdc.R")

```

*** =sample_code
```{r}
# Type the code from the 'Instructions' box to change the *smoke100* variable to a factor variable

# Use the str() function on cdc
```

*** =solution
```{r}
# Type the code from the 'Instructions' box to change the *smoke100* variable to a factor variable
cdc$smoke100 <- factor(cdc$smoke100, labels = c("no smoke", "yes smoke"))

# Use the str() function on mtcars
str(cdc)
```

*** =sct
```{r}

test_function("str", args = "object")
```

--- type:MultipleChoiceExercise lang:r xp:50 skills:1 key:ee655438c8
## Quick Review of Variable Types

Is a `factor` coded variable an example of a *quantitative* variable or a *categorical* variable?

*** =instructions
- Quantitative
- Categorical
*** =hint

*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}

```

*** =sct
```{r}
msg_bad <- "That's incorrect. A factor variable is a categorical variable!"
msg_success <- "Good answer!"

test_mc(correct = 2, feedback_msgs = c(msg_bad, msg_success))
```

--- type:NormalExercise lang:r xp:100 skills:1 key:b715998152
## Summarizing Quantitative Variables

In this exercise, you will practice using the `favstats()` function from the *mosaic* package in R. This function will return the `min`, `max`, `mean`, `sd` and a few other numerical summaries of a quantitative variable.

To use the `favstats()` function, use the format:
`library(mosaic)`
`favstats(dataset$quant_var)`


The dataset we've been working with (`cdc`) and the *mosaic* package are already in your workspace.

The variable `weight` is the respondents weight in *pounds*.

*** =instructions
- Find summary statistics of the `weight` variable in the `cdc` dataset using the `favstats()` function.
- Find summary statistics of the `height` variable in the `cdc` dataset using the `favstats()` function.
- Find the standard deviation of the `weight` variable in `cdc` using the `favstats()` function.

*** =hint
substitute `cdc` for dataset

*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}
source("https://www.openintro.org/stat/data/cdc.R")
library(mosaic)
```

*** =sample_code
```{r}
# Find the mean weight of cdc
# load the mosaic package

# Find the median weight of cdc

# Find the standard deviation of the weight of cdc
```

*** =solution
```{r}

# Find the mean weight of cdc
mean(cdc$weight)

# Find the median weight of cdc
median(cdc$weight)

# Find the standard deviation of the weight of cdc
sd(cdc$weight)
```

*** =sct
```{r}
test_function("mean", args = "x")
test_function("median", args = "x")
test_function("sd", args = "x")
```




--- type:NormalExercise lang:r xp:100 skills:1 key:c7db7fdc55
## Summarizing categorical Variables

To summarize categorical variables, we can use the `table()` function to see the frequency of occurences at each level of the categorical variable.

To create a table, use the format:

`table(dataset$categ_var)`

*** =instructions
- summarize the `smoke100` variable in the `cdc` dataset using the `table()` function.
- Click the 'Submit Answer' Button and take a look at the R output in the console.
*** =hint
Use the format from the lesson with `cdc` instead of dataset, and `smoke100` instead of categ_var
*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}
source("https://www.openintro.org/stat/data/cdc.R")
cdc$smoke100 <- factor(cdc$smoke100, labels = c("no smoke", "yes smoke"))

```

*** =sample_code
```{r}
# Type table(dataset$categ_var) with specified dataset and variable to get a table summary
```

*** =solution
```{r}
# Type table(dataset$categ_var) with specified dataset and variable to get a table summary
table(cdc$smoke100)
```

*** =sct
```{r}
test_function("table", args = "...")

```



--- type:NormalExercise lang:r xp:100 skills:1 key:9fc43281cb
## Contingency Tables

A contingency table is used to summarize the relationship betweeen categorical variables. 

In this exercise we will create a contingency table by cross-classifying two variables using the `table()` function with the form:

`table(dataset$var1, dataset$var2)`

Note: The variable listed first (var1) will go along the rows and the variable listed second (var2) will go along the columns.

The variable `genhlth` is a categorical variable indicating general health.

*** =instructions
- Create a contingency table with variables `genhlth` and `smoke100` from the `cdc` dataset
*** =hint
Use the format from the lesson with `cdc` instead of dataset, `genhlth` instead of var1, and `smoke100` instead of var2

*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}
source("https://www.openintro.org/stat/data/cdc.R")
cdc$smoke100 <- factor(cdc$smoke100, labels = c("no smoke", "yes smoke"))

```

*** =sample_code
```{r}
# Create contingency table with variables `genhlth` and `smoke100`
```

*** =solution
```{r}
# Create contingency table with variables `genhlth` and `smoke100`
table(cdc$genhlth, cdc$smoke100)
```

*** =sct
```{r}
test_function("table", args = "...")
```
--- type:NormalExercise lang:r xp:100 skills:1 key:9a4fea2da0
## Visualizing Quantitative Data in R
The two main visualizations of quantitative data are:

*Histogram* - represents the distribution of quantitative data

- use `hist(dataset$variable)` to create a histogram

*Boxplot* - used to visualize the variation of quantitative data

- use `boxplot(dataset$variable)` to create a boxplot

*** =instructions
- Create a histogram of the `weight` variable from the `cdc` dataset using the `hist()` function
- Click the 'Submit Answer' Button and take a look at the R output in the console.
*** =hint

*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}
source("https://www.openintro.org/stat/data/cdc.R")

```

*** =sample_code
```{r}
# Create Histogram of weight variable with hist() function
```

*** =solution
```{r}
hist(cdc$weight)
```

*** =sct
```{r}
test_function("hist", args = "x")
```


--- type:NormalExercise lang:r xp:100 skills:1 key:b65646dd8a
## Visualizing Categorical Data in R

The most common way to visualize categorical variables is by creating a *barplot*.

To do this in R, use the format:

`barplot(table(dataset$categ_var))`

*** =instructions
- Create a barplot of the categorical variable `smoke100` from the `cdc` dataset
- Click the 'Submit Answer' Button and take a look at the R output in the console.
*** =hint

*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}
source("https://www.openintro.org/stat/data/cdc.R")
cdc$smoke100 <- factor(cdc$smoke100, labels = c("no smoke", "yes smoke"))

```

*** =sample_code
```{r}
# Create barplot of the smoke100 variable in cdc dataset



```

*** =solution
```{r}
# Create barplot of the smoke100 variable in cdc dataset

barplot(table(cdc$smoke100))
```

*** =sct
```{r}
test_student_typed("barplot(table(cdc$smoke100))")
```



--- type:NormalExercise lang:r xp:100 skills:1 key:c6f71ca0bd
## Visualizing Relationships between 2 Quantitative Variables

If we have two quantitative variables, we can visualize their relationship with the `plot()` function. 

The format to make a basic scatterplot is:

`plot(x = dataset$var1 , y = dataset$var2)`


For this exercise, we are going to visualize the relationship between `weight` and `height` in the `cdc` dataset:

x = `weight` 

y = `height`

*** =instructions
- Use the `plot()` function to create a scatterplot of `weight` and `height`.
- After clicking 'Submit Answer', look at the plot in the output. Is there any pattern?
*** =hint

*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}
source("https://www.openintro.org/stat/data/cdc.R")

```

*** =sample_code
```{r}
# Use plot() to create scatterplot of weight and height


```

*** =solution
```{r}
# Use plot() to create scatterplot of weight and height

plot(x = cdc$weight, y = cdc$height)
```

*** =sct
```{r}
test_function("plot", args = c("x", "y"))

```



--- type:NormalExercise lang:r xp:100 skills:1 key:fca8885b03
## Visualizing Quantitative Variables by Groups

Sometimes we want to compare a quantitative variable across the different groups of a categorical variable. 

To do this, we can use the `boxplot()` function of the format:

`boxplot(dataset$quant_var ~ dataset$categ_var)`

This will produce side by side boxplots.

*** =instructions

Create side-by-side boxplots to compare the `weight` of respondents in the `cdc` dataset by whether or not they are/were a smoker `smoke100`.



*** =hint
Use format in the lesson with `weight` = `quant_var`, `cdc` = `dataset`, `smoke100` = `categ_var`
*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}
source("https://www.openintro.org/stat/data/cdc.R")
cdc$smoke100 <- factor(cdc$smoke100, labels = c("no smoke", "yes smoke"))


```

*** =sample_code
```{r}
# Create side-by-side boxplots with quant_var = weight and categ_var = smoke100
```

*** =solution
```{r}
# Create side-by-side boxplots with quant_var = weight and categ_var = smoke100

boxplot(cdc$weight ~ cdc$smoke100)
```

*** =sct
```{r}
test_student_typed("boxplot(cdc$weight ~ cdc$smoke100)")
```

Commit message:

updated lab 4b to include mosaic

chapter3.md, after:

---
title       : Lab 3 
description : Summarizing and Visualizing Data

--- type:NormalExercise lang:r xp:100 skills:1 key:fe98ce0ad3
## Using the srt() function to reveal Variable Types

If we want to know the *types of variables* in our data set, we can type the command `str(dataset)` into the R Console.

This will return all of the variable names as well as their type (i.e. numeric, factor, integer). 

*Categorical* variables will be will be `factor` variable types.

*Quantitative* variables will be `numeric` and `integer` variable types.

For this lab, we will use a dataset called `cdc` which contains data on the health of people in the United States.

- there are 9 variables in the dataset
- there are 20,000 subjects
- this dataset is already in your workspace so if you type `cdc` into your console, the data will come up in the output

*** =instructions

- Use the `str()` function to find the variable types of `cdc`
- Click the 'Submit Answer' Button and take a look at the R output in the console.
*** =hint

*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}
source("https://www.openintro.org/stat/data/cdc.R")

```

*** =sample_code
```{r}
# Find the variable types of cdc
```

*** =solution
```{r}
# Find the variable types of cdc
str(cdc)
```



*** =sct
```{r}
test_function("str", args = "object")
```


--- type:NormalExercise lang:r xp:100 skills:1 key:53e494b387
## Changing Variable Types

You may have noticed from the previous exercise that the `smoke100` variable is coded as numeric, but this is incorrect.


R thinks that the `smoke100` variable is 'numeric' but really it should be coded as 'factor' because it is a **categorical variable**. 

`smoke100` only takes on two values *(1 = respondent has smoked at least 100 cigarettes in their life, 0 = otherwise)*. 

In this exercise we are going to recode the `smoke100` variable from a numeric to a factor variable type.


*** =instructions
- Copy this code to your R script: `cdc$smoke100 <- factor(cdc$smoke100, labels = c("no smoke", "yes smoke"))`
- Use the `str()` function on `cdc` 
- Click the 'Submit Answer' Button and take a look at the R output in the console. Make sure the `smoke100` variable was correctly recoded to a factor variable
*** =hint

*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}
source("https://www.openintro.org/stat/data/cdc.R")

```

*** =sample_code
```{r}
# Type the code from the 'Instructions' box to change the *smoke100* variable to a factor variable

# Use the str() function on cdc
```

*** =solution
```{r}
# Type the code from the 'Instructions' box to change the *smoke100* variable to a factor variable
cdc$smoke100 <- factor(cdc$smoke100, labels = c("no smoke", "yes smoke"))

# Use the str() function on mtcars
str(cdc)
```

*** =sct
```{r}

test_function("str", args = "object")
```

--- type:MultipleChoiceExercise lang:r xp:50 skills:1 key:ee655438c8
## Quick Review of Variable Types

Is a `factor` coded variable an example of a *quantitative* variable or a *categorical* variable?

*** =instructions
- Quantitative
- Categorical
*** =hint

*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}

```

*** =sct
```{r}
msg_bad <- "That's incorrect. A factor variable is a categorical variable!"
msg_success <- "Good answer!"

test_mc(correct = 2, feedback_msgs = c(msg_bad, msg_success))
```

--- type:NormalExercise lang:r xp:100 skills:1 key:b715998152
## Summarizing Quantitative Variables

In this exercise, you will practice using the `favstats()` function from the *mosaic* package in R. This function will return the `min`, `max`, `mean`, `sd` and a few other numerical summaries of a quantitative variable.

To use the `favstats()` function, use the format:
`favstats(dataset$quant_var)`


The dataset we've been working with (`cdc`) and the *mosaic* package are already in your workspace.


*** =instructions
- Find summary statistics of the `weight` variable in the `cdc` dataset using the `favstats()` function.
- Find summary statistics of the `height` variable in `cdc` using the `favstats()` function.
- Find summary statistics of the `age` variable in `cdc` using the `favstats()` function.

*** =hint
substitute `cdc` for dataset

*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}
source("https://www.openintro.org/stat/data/cdc.R")
library(mosaic)
```

*** =sample_code
```{r}
# Use the favstats() function to explore weight in the cdc dataset 


# Use the favstats() function to explore height in the cdc dataset 


# Use the favstats() function to explore age in the cdc dataset 


```

*** =solution
```{r}

# Use the favstats() function to explore weight in the cdc dataset 
favstats(cdc$weight)

# Use the favstats() function to explore height in the cdc dataset 
favstats(cdc$height)

# Use the favstats() function to explore age in the cdc dataset 
favstats(cdc$age)


```

*** =sct
```{r}
test_function("favstats", args = "x")

```




--- type:NormalExercise lang:r xp:100 skills:1 key:c7db7fdc55
## Summarizing categorical Variables

To summarize categorical variables, we can use the `table()` function to see the frequency of occurences at each level of the categorical variable.

To create a table, use the format:

`table(dataset$categ_var)`

*** =instructions
- summarize the `smoke100` variable in the `cdc` dataset using the `table()` function.
- Click the 'Submit Answer' Button and take a look at the R output in the console.
*** =hint
Use the format from the lesson with `cdc` instead of dataset, and `smoke100` instead of categ_var
*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}
source("https://www.openintro.org/stat/data/cdc.R")
cdc$smoke100 <- factor(cdc$smoke100, labels = c("no smoke", "yes smoke"))

```

*** =sample_code
```{r}
# Type table(dataset$categ_var) with specified dataset and variable to get a table summary
```

*** =solution
```{r}
# Type table(dataset$categ_var) with specified dataset and variable to get a table summary
table(cdc$smoke100)
```

*** =sct
```{r}
test_function("table", args = "...")

```



--- type:NormalExercise lang:r xp:100 skills:1 key:9fc43281cb
## Contingency Tables

A contingency table is used to summarize the relationship betweeen categorical variables. 

In this exercise we will create a contingency table by cross-classifying two variables using the `table()` function with the form:

`table(dataset$var1, dataset$var2)`

Note: The variable listed first (var1) will go along the rows and the variable listed second (var2) will go along the columns.

The variable `genhlth` is a categorical variable indicating general health.

*** =instructions
- Create a contingency table with variables `genhlth` and `smoke100` from the `cdc` dataset
*** =hint
Use the format from the lesson with `cdc` instead of dataset, `genhlth` instead of var1, and `smoke100` instead of var2

*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}
source("https://www.openintro.org/stat/data/cdc.R")
cdc$smoke100 <- factor(cdc$smoke100, labels = c("no smoke", "yes smoke"))

```

*** =sample_code
```{r}
# Create contingency table with variables `genhlth` and `smoke100`
```

*** =solution
```{r}
# Create contingency table with variables `genhlth` and `smoke100`
table(cdc$genhlth, cdc$smoke100)
```

*** =sct
```{r}
test_function("table", args = "...")
```
--- type:NormalExercise lang:r xp:100 skills:1 key:9a4fea2da0
## Visualizing Quantitative Data in R
The two main visualizations of quantitative data are:

*Histogram* - represents the distribution of quantitative data

- use `hist(dataset$variable)` to create a histogram

*Boxplot* - used to visualize the variation of quantitative data

- use `boxplot(dataset$variable)` to create a boxplot

*** =instructions
- Create a histogram of the `weight` variable from the `cdc` dataset using the `hist()` function
- Click the 'Submit Answer' Button and take a look at the R output in the console.
*** =hint

*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}
source("https://www.openintro.org/stat/data/cdc.R")

```

*** =sample_code
```{r}
# Create Histogram of weight variable with hist() function
```

*** =solution
```{r}
hist(cdc$weight)
```

*** =sct
```{r}
test_function("hist", args = "x")
```


--- type:NormalExercise lang:r xp:100 skills:1 key:b65646dd8a
## Visualizing Categorical Data in R

The most common way to visualize categorical variables is by creating a *barplot*.

To do this in R, use the format:

`barplot(table(dataset$categ_var))`

*** =instructions
- Create a barplot of the categorical variable `smoke100` from the `cdc` dataset
- Click the 'Submit Answer' Button and take a look at the R output in the console.
*** =hint

*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}
source("https://www.openintro.org/stat/data/cdc.R")
cdc$smoke100 <- factor(cdc$smoke100, labels = c("no smoke", "yes smoke"))

```

*** =sample_code
```{r}
# Create barplot of the smoke100 variable in cdc dataset



```

*** =solution
```{r}
# Create barplot of the smoke100 variable in cdc dataset

barplot(table(cdc$smoke100))
```

*** =sct
```{r}
test_student_typed("barplot(table(cdc$smoke100))")
```



--- type:NormalExercise lang:r xp:100 skills:1 key:c6f71ca0bd
## Visualizing Relationships between 2 Quantitative Variables

If we have two quantitative variables, we can visualize their relationship with the `plot()` function. 

The format to make a basic scatterplot is:

`plot(x = dataset$var1 , y = dataset$var2)`


For this exercise, we are going to visualize the relationship between `weight` and `height` in the `cdc` dataset:

x = `weight` 

y = `height`

*** =instructions
- Use the `plot()` function to create a scatterplot of `weight` and `height`.
- After clicking 'Submit Answer', look at the plot in the output. Is there any pattern?
*** =hint

*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}
source("https://www.openintro.org/stat/data/cdc.R")

```

*** =sample_code
```{r}
# Use plot() to create scatterplot of weight and height


```

*** =solution
```{r}
# Use plot() to create scatterplot of weight and height

plot(x = cdc$weight, y = cdc$height)
```

*** =sct
```{r}
test_function("plot", args = c("x", "y"))

```



--- type:NormalExercise lang:r xp:100 skills:1 key:fca8885b03
## Visualizing Quantitative Variables by Groups

Sometimes we want to compare a quantitative variable across the different groups of a categorical variable. 

To do this, we can use the `boxplot()` function of the format:

`boxplot(dataset$quant_var ~ dataset$categ_var)`

This will produce side by side boxplots.

*** =instructions

Create side-by-side boxplots to compare the `weight` of respondents in the `cdc` dataset by whether or not they are/were a smoker `smoke100`.



*** =hint
Use format in the lesson with `weight` = `quant_var`, `cdc` = `dataset`, `smoke100` = `categ_var`
*** =pre_exercise_code
```{r}
source("https://www.openintro.org/stat/data/cdc.R")
cdc$smoke100 <- factor(cdc$smoke100, labels = c("no smoke", "yes smoke"))


```

*** =sample_code
```{r}
# Create side-by-side boxplots with quant_var = weight and categ_var = smoke100
```

*** =solution
```{r}
# Create side-by-side boxplots with quant_var = weight and categ_var = smoke100

boxplot(cdc$weight ~ cdc$smoke100)
```

*** =sct
```{r}
test_student_typed("boxplot(cdc$weight ~ cdc$smoke100)")
```
